RL Infrastructure

While the pseudocode of GRPO fits in fewer than 30
lines, implementing an efficient RLVR training loop is
a substantial systems engineering effort [Team Olmo
et al. 2025; Prime Intellect Team et al. 2025].
It relies on two main components:
• the trainer, which consumes batches of experience and runs GRPO (or other) to update the
policy weights.
• the inference engine, which collects rollouts
by executing the policy in the environment.
It can involve tool use (like web requests) or
code execution.

123

Each typically runs on multiple interconnected GPU
nodes. The process thus mixes two very different
workloads: training (compute-bound) and inference
(memory bandwidth-bound), each with a different
framework (Megatron or TorchTitan vs. vLLM or
SGLang). The two must communicate and be orchestrated to minimize idle time on either side. Another difficulty is that as training progresses, the
policy tends to generate longer rollouts (longer reasoning chains, more tool calls, . . . ), which makes
inference disproportionately more expensive due to
the quadratic cost of attention in sequence length.

124

Trainer
compute-bound
Megatron, TorchTitan

updated
weights

batch of
rollouts

Inference engine
memory-bandwidth-bound
vLLM, SGLang

Figure 5.3: The two main components of an RLVR
training loop. Each side is itself a fleet of GPU nodes,
the inference fleet being allocated several times more
GPU than the trainer (e.g. 3:1 ratio).

Several optimizations can be implemented to improve overall hardware utilization:
• Asynchronous training and inference. The
two components run in parallel without waiting for each other. Typically, after having collected a batch of rollouts, the inference engine
doesn’t wait for updated weights from this
batch to start collecting the next one. This
makes the rollouts collected with an older policy and thus introduce off-policyness.
125

• Continuous batching. There is a lot of discrepancy between different rollouts in a same
batch (response length, tool use, . . . ) and thus
a lot of time can be lost waiting for the longest
rollout to finish before starting the next batch.
Continuous batching repopulates a rollout slot
as soon as it is finished.
• In-Flight weight updates. This technique
makes the inference engine continuously poll
the trainer for new weights, thus using the latest policy as soon as it is available. This leads to
a single rollout being generated with multiple
policies, but in a sense limits off-policyness.
These optimizations are a trade-off between hardware efficiency and algorithmic fidelity, more particularly off-policyness.

126

π0

π1

π2

trainer

inference

+ asynchrone

+ continuous
batching

+ in-flight
weight updates

Figure 5.4: Overview of the different optimizations
to improve hardware utilization in an RLVR training
loop. The blue color intensity indicates the policy
used to generate each rollout segment.

Another consideration to take into account is the mismatch between the training and inference engines.
These are exacerbated by the presence of Mixture Of
Experts (MoE) which can, from a slight numerical difference, route tokens to different experts which further increase the training-inference mismatch. The

127

rollout policy, denoted as µθ , while using the same
weights as the training policy πθ , thus produces different outputs which biases the gradient estimator.
One fix [F. Yao et al. 2025] is to take this discrepancy
into account in another importance sampling ratio:
πθold (yt |x, y<t )
µθold (yt |x, y<t )
which leads to the global importance sampling ratio:
ρt (θ) =

πθ (yt |x, y<t )
πθ (yt |x, y<t ) πθold (yt |x, y<t )
=
·
µθold (yt |x, y<t )
πθold (yt |x, y<t ) µθold (yt |x, y<t )

this ratio corrects the mismatch in action selection: the first ratio corrects for the fact that we perform multiple updates and have therefore drifted
from the old policy (derived in Section 4.3.2), while
the second corrects the training-inference mismatch.
The expectation is now under the rollout policy µθold ,
and we correct with ρt (θ).