Improvement

The improvement step of AlphaGo Zero is done each
time the agent has to pick an action, rather than
globally at the end of an episode like in traditional
policy iteration.
Considering state s0 that the agent has to act on, the
goal is to find an action a according to an improved

132

version of the current policy πθ .
This is done by traversing the Bellman backup diagram starting from s0 . Instead of traversing it exhaustively, AlphaGo Zero grows a partial tree, concentrating computation on the regions of the tree
that look promising under the current πθ and Vϕ :
s0

s0

Vϕ

Iteration k

s0

Vϕ

Iteration k + 1

Many iterations later

Figure 6.1: A single improvement step grows a partial tree through repeated traversals from s0 . Each
traversal (red) follows a selection rule trading off
exploration and exploitation. It expands the tree
by one node and backs up the statistics of the path
it followed, starting from the bootstrap Vϕ (leaf).
The most promising lines of play are thus the most
densely explored. This is a modified version of an
MCTS rollout.

After a fixed budget of traversals, the visit counts at

133

the root concentrate on the most promising actions
and define an improved policy at s0 , from which the
agent samples its action.
We can think about this improvement step as approximating the optimality Bellman operator [Grill et al.
2020]:


Vϕ (s0 ) ← max E r(s0 , a, s′ ) + γVϕ (s′ ) ,
a

using the tree, and using the policy as a prior to focus
the search and make it tractable.
We can also, more intuitively, think about the base
policy πθ as a kind of intuition policy, and the search
as a “thinking” process that mentally unrolls and
simulates the possible futures.
s0

µ = improve(π | s0 )

z = +1

Figure 6.2: Each action of the result is the output of
an inner search rooted at st . From one improvement
step to the next, the tree can be partially reused.

134

6.3

Evaluation

Once experience has been collected by acting according to the improved policy and rewards z collected,
the evaluation phase takes place.
The value function is fit to evaluate the improved
policy, using MC evaluation:
X
2
LV (ϕ) =
Vϕ (s) − z .
s

and the base policy is trained using behavior cloning
/ SFT to reproduce the improved policy:
XX
µ(a|s) log πθ (a|s),
Lπ (θ) = −
s

a

The base policy π can be seen as the fast, intuitive
System 1, and the search-improved policy µ as the
slow, deliberate System 2. The evaluation phase distills System 2 back into System 1.