An example

Let us look at a complete reinforcement learning
project: learning to land a Starship rocket. In this
project, the goal is to control the final phase of descent and make the vehicle land upright on a landing
pad. The environment was built in Unity and the
training was done with the Unity ML-Agents toolkit,
using PPO [Schulman, Wolski, et al. 2017] (which is a
model-free, actor-critic RL algorithm). The agent receives observations describing the state of the rocket,
such as its position, speed, and orientation, and must
choose among 162 discrete actions combining engine
on/off, engine gimballing, and RCS commands.

31

Figure 2.1: 3D rendering of the RL environment. The
rocket is firing its engines to slow down and land on
the pad.

This is a natural RL problem because it’s easy to
frame as a game. The state corresponds to the physical situation of the rocket at a given time: where it is,
how fast it moves, and how it is oriented. It’s a vector
containing 11 real-valued numbers. The actions are
the control decisions available to the agent, such as
firing the engines, changing their direction, or using
side thrusters. The reward is meant to capture the
objective of the task: a successful landing. In other
words, we do not tell the agent how to land. We only
define what counts as success, and let it discover a
strategy through trial and error.

32

This problem also helps illustrate the four main challenges of RL we discussed above:
• Credit assignment problem Trajectories in
the environment typically span thousands of
time steps, and the reward is only given at
the end of the episode. A successful landing
may depend on a sequence of thousands of
actions, and it is not clear which ones were
responsible for the success. The agent must
discover which actions to reinforce based on
the (very) long-term consequences they have
on the final reward.
• Optimization instability
This is how the rewards look during training.

Figure 2.2: Reward curve during training.

Note that it is the only signal available during
training for us to know if the agent is improving or not. This is very different from a smooth
loss curve as seen in supervised learning.

33

• Reward function This has probably been the
most difficult part of this project. Ideally, as
said before, we would like to have a simple
reward function that directly encodes the real
goal of the task. That would imply giving a
reward of +1 whenever the landing is successful, and 0 otherwise. However, this reward is
extremely sparse: at the beginning of training,
landing a rocket is almost impossible for a random policy (it starts 5000m in the air with a
random orientation). Even given an enormous
exploration budget, obtaining a single successful landing by chance is extremely unlikely,
thus the agent never receives any learning signal.
One solution to this problem would be to give
a denser reward, for example by giving a small
positive reward for getting closer to the landing pad, a small negative reward for having too
high a velocity, etc. But this is very delicate as
it is prone to reward hacking: the agent may
learn to maximize the reward in a way that
does not actually lead to successful landings.
For example, it may learn to hover at a certain
height above the landing pad, which gives a
good reward for being close, but never actually
land.
Another solution is to use curriculum learning:
34

instead of starting from the full problem, we
can start with an easier version of it, thereby
making random exploration actually lead to
some successful landings. For example, we can
start by spawning the rocket much closer to the
ground, or with a more favorable orientation.
This way, the agent can experience success
more easily, and then gradually learn to handle
more difficult situations as training progresses.
The sparse reward function was finally chosen in combination with curriculum learning.
It turned out not to be enough at the beginning of training, so imitation learning was also
used briefly by providing demonstrations of
successful behavior so that the agent could experience reward at least a few times. Once
it had discovered trajectories leading to success, standard RL took over and started improving the policy further. Note that the imitation
phase accounted for less than 0.001% of the
total training. All the real progress was made
thanks to RL on more and more difficult trajectories, spawning the spaceship straight from
500m at the beginning of the curriculum to
5000m in the sky with random orientation at
the hardest level. Note that this explains the
non-monotonicity of the reward curve during
training, as landings were made harder and

35

harder as training progressed.
• Exploration-exploitation dilemma During
training, the RL algorithm (PPO) ensures that
the policy always has a bit of randomness,
which allows for some exploration (i.e. try
actions which are, according to the agent’s
knowledge, suboptimal). This is particularly
important in this case because of curriculum
learning: because the setup is changing during training, the agent must keep exploring
and not get stuck in a local optimum that only
works for the current curriculum level.
Learn more about this project at
github.com/alxndrTL/Landing-Starships.

36

Practical Notes
The companion repository for this book is available
at:

github.com/alxndrTL/little-book-rl
It contains:
• One-file Python/PyTorch implementations of every algorithm (each linked in the body of the
book)
• Supplementary material for proofs
• Notebooks to reproduce all figures

37

Part II

Diving deeper

Chapter 3

Value functions
This chapter focuses on detailing the different ways
we can compute value functions. We will find that all
methods, however different they may seem, follow a
common pattern.
As we said in Chapter 2, such functions will be used
downstream to derive a policy.