VPG vs. PPO

On CartPole, we compare how robust VPG and PPO
are to re-using the same batch of trajectories for multiple gradient steps. An algorithm capable of doing
so extracts more information from each batch, and
thus is more data-efficient.

108

Figure 4.10: Episode return as a function of total
training environment steps on CartPole, for VPG
(left) and PPO (right) with K ∈ {1, 4, 16} epochs
per batch. Because each batch is split into 8 minibatches, each epoch corresponds to 8 gradient steps.

The setting K = 1 gives very similar performance
for both because, as we noted earlier, the first gradient step of PPO is the same as VPG. However, while
raising K from 1 to 16 yields faster convergence for
PPO, it is much more brittle and even leads to irrecoverable policy collapse for VPG. This is explained by
the following figure:

109

Figure 4.11: Cumulative approximate KL divergence
between the current policy and the data-generating
policy, measured per mini-batch gradient step within
a single iteration (K = 10 epochs × 8 mini-batches
= 80 steps)

Put differently, PPO makes sure that the new policy
behaves similarly to the previous one. One could
argue that using a smaller step size for VPG would
also make it possible to re-use the same batch, but
this would control the drift in parameter space rather
than in policy space. The approximation of the surrogate objective is done with dπθ ≈ dπθold , whose
validity requires closeness in policy space, which is
not necessarily obtained by closeness in parameter
space.
PPO limits the drift in policy space by stopping the
gradient on actions which have already drifted too
far, while still making learning progress on the rest
of the batch.
110

Part III

RL at scale

Chapter 5

RL × LLMs
So far we have built up the RL toolkit on general problems. This chapter applies that toolkit to a specific
setting: LLM training.
In this setting, the Large Language Model (LLM) that
we want to train has already been pretrained on trillions of tokens and is a very powerful conditional
distribution over text, that we refer to as the base
model. At that stage, it encodes a lot of knowledge
but its behaviour is very hard to predict and control,
making that knowledge difficult to leverage.
This is why one of the central efforts in the LLM field
since late 2022 has been fine-tuning base models. The
most direct option is through supervised fine-tuning

113

(SFT), which consists of collecting demonstrations
of the desired behaviour and training the model to
imitate them. While being simple to implement and
somewhat effective, it requires demonstrations. RL
on the other hand needs no demonstrations, only a
reward function that scores model outputs and lets
the model search for behaviour that scores well.
This can be preferable to SFT because RL can learn
behaviour that was never demonstrated such as decomposing a problem, considering alternatives or
checking its own work. Also, because the signal
comes from a reward rather than from a fixed humanwritten target, RL can in principle push models past
the level of any specific human demonstrator.
Two distinct generations of RL training of LLMs have
emerged so far.
First generation: alignment (RLHF). The first
wave, around 2022, used RL to turn a base model into
a chatbot or assistant. It consisted first in training a
reward model able to predict human preferences between two model outputs, and then using that reward
to fine-tune the base model with RL, i.e., reinforcing
the generated tokens that led to highly-rewarded sequences. This RLHF (Reinforcement Learning with
Human Feedback) recipe was very effective and behind the success of products like ChatGPT. However,
it turned out that RL on its own was not strictly nec114

essary to such alignment procedures. The RL was
constrained both by how reliable the reward model
was and by what it actually rewarded. Predicting
human preferences is quite a shallow signal determined mostly by tone and style. It gives the model
no incentive to reason, plan, or develop any new
capability.
Second generation: reasoning (RLVR). The
second wave, starting in 2024, uses RL to train
models in environments with verifiable rewards
(Reinforcement Learning with Verifiable
Rewards, RLVR). The most common setup is
to give the model math problems and reward it
for producing the correct numerical answer. A
byproduct of this training setup is that it teaches
the model to reason and learn thinking actions like
planning, decomposing a problem, backtracking or
self-checking. Such verifiable rewards are natural
to obtain on STEM tasks, where correctness can be
checked mechanically, but much harder to construct
for open-ended tasks like creative writing.
This setup differs from RLHF in that the reward is
more “interesting” to optimize against (i.e., optimising against it tends to develop or resurface reasoning
capabilities) and is more robust to reward hacking.
This makes it practical to run RLVR at much larger
scale than RLHF, often approaching a non-trivial frac-

115

tion of pretraining (>10%).
The rest of this chapter focuses on RLVR.